# Internal Islands of Self-Governance

In  ancient  India,  people  used  to  take  decision on issues  of  governance.  In modern times  same  is happening in some countries which are known to a lot of people. However, there are examples of such a system in India, too which people are not aware off. Everyone thinks that it is not possible in India. But this assumption is wrong. In many areas of our country, by the efforts of local leadership, certain experiments in democracy have been found to be successful. These experiments brought about valuable change in the local administration. We look into some of them.

#### Hivare Bazar Village in Maharashtra

Hivare Bazar is a small village located hundred kilometers from Pune in the district of Ahmadnagar in Maharashtra. It faced many a famine from 1972 to 1989. These famines put extreme financial pressure on the villagers, who started to desert the village to move towards Pune and Mumbai. Ninety percent of the population of this village went below the poverty line. Every household was making alcohol and the people were uneducated and alcoholics. There were warring groups that constantly fought and people killed each other. Visit of Police was a common feature of this village that was full of vice.

In 1989 a group of young boys got together with a mission to change the face of the village. They selected a boy, named Popat Rao Pawar, who was studying Masters in Commerce at the Mumbai University, their Sarpanch. They then approached the elders of each of the warring groups of the village and requested that Popat Rao Pawar should be named as the Sarpanch of the village. The elders scoffed the young boys but just to humour them they decided to choose Popat Rao as their sarpanch for a period of one year, who had promised to change the establishment.

Popat Rao had a single point agenda that whatever he did, the decision to do work would be taken jointly by all people of the village and not by him alone.  According to government rules, meetings of two gram sabhas, on 15th August and 26th  January, were mandatory in a year. However, he started to call meetings of gram sabhas every week of the month. On every problem he would call the gram sabhas, deliberate on the issues that beset them and would find a solution, acceptable to all concerned Sabha members.

Some dramatic change started to take place. In 1989 the average yearly income was Rs. 840. Today the average income has risen to Rs.28000/- per year. In other words, if there are five members in a house hold, its income became Rs.140000. For a village this is a huge sum of money.

Now, there are good metal roads. The people who lived in slum clusters earlier have good clean houses to live. There is a village hospital and an excellent school. There is no theft of ration because it is a transparent operation, where the ration is unloaded in front of people and distributed to people who need it. While every household earlier was brewing local alcohol, now people do not even talk about alcohol. In last five years not a single police case has been registered. Self governance has brought in a transformation.

Popat Rao was made sarpanch for one year by the people of the village. What is interesting that he has become so popular that he is now sarpanch for last twenty years because the people are totally satisfied with his work. No one stands for the post of sarpanch against him because he is chosen sarpanch without opposition and no one can beat him in election.

The biggest reason for all this is the participation of people in the process of governance of the village. Popat Rao does not have a personal agenda but his agenda is the agenda of the people of the village. His decisions are the collective decisions of the people.

It was written in earlier part of the book that Government policies and schemes have converted people to “beggar status”. Popat Rao took a bold step and he kept aside all the schemes of the government and went to the people of the village to find their problems, to find what they desired and what should be done to achieve their goals. Some wanted drinking water and some wanted water for irrigation. Some wanted to have electricity and some wanted school. Finally it was decided that school was everyone’s priority. Popat did not write to the government or approached any department to make a school. He asked the people of Gram Sabha if some one could offer vacant rooms for the school. Two people offered two rooms each and so a school was established in four rooms. Then there was the need of teachers for the school. Popat did not approach the government to appoint school teachers or asked them to send them from elsewhere. Four boys volunteered to teach and so the school started to function. Within a year the result of the school bore fruits.

In the beginning, Popat Rao informs that the gram Sabha was rife with rivalry of warring groups and therefore, the people hardly ever attended the sabhas. But when they saw that the sarpanch was working towards the good of all people, slowly they started to participate in the functioning of the Sabha meetings. Poapt was responsible for opening the school. This act gave confidence to the villagers in the Gram Sabha model that took collective decisions.

The villagers discussed in the gram sabhas the problem of water level having fallen to eighty feet because of famines of last few years. There was an urgent need for storing water. Joint decision was taken that villagers should plant trees and uses various methods to collect and store water. Again the government departments were not approached. The villagers planted trees on their own initiative. Water was collected using indigenous methods and stored, resulting in water level rising to fifteen feet from eighty feet. Earlier they were not able to harvest even one crop now they were able to harvest two or three crops in a year.

It is very interesting to know that in 1980 the trees that were planted by the forest departments were cut down by the villagers for fire wood. These were not their trees. They belonged to the government. The villagers were not attached to those trees. The trees, which they planted now, were their own trees and no one was allowed to cut them for fire wood. It was a joint effort that was responsible for the progress of the village and its ecology.

After hearing the story of Hivare Bazar, some people argued that the reason of progress of this village was the leadership provided by the sarpanch. It is right that there was contribution of Popat Rao in the

development. But one of the biggest reasons for success of Popat Rao was, more than his leadership, his ability to collectively take decisions in which everyone was responsible for the results.

Who is a good Sarpanch is the question that comes to our mind? We have met a lot of people who are good sarpanch. They are honest and do not indulge in theft of government money. We met a sarpanch who was very good and well meaning person. He was loaded with money and spent his own money for development works in his area. He carried out a lot of work of his own free will without taking consent from the people. He did not fulfill people’s demands but his own that he thought were good for the people. He constructed a public toilet outside the village with his own money. The public toilets are not being used by the public and are now closed because of disuse. People of the village did not want a toilet but they wanted something else.

This person is not a good sarpanch. A good Sarpanch is one who listens to people’s wishes and fulfills them. He should implement works based on majority decisions of gram sabhas and not on his whims and fancies.

Popat Rao is a good sarpanch because he had taken all decisions which were the decisions of the people, too. In today’s panchayat raj system gram sabhas have not been given any powers. When a sarpanch takes decisions which are the collective decisions of the gram sabhas, progress takes place but where sarpanch takes decisions on his own without taking people’s wishes there is no progress.

The goodness of the sarpanch depends on the fact that the decisions taken by the sarpanch are actually decisions of the gram sabhas also. The good sarpanch is like Popat Rao who worked for the people.

But we need to change sarpanch centered politics of this country.

When we change the law and empower the people then we will not wait for Popat Raos. There will be no bad or good sarpanch. The people will take collective decisions which will have to be accepted by the sarpanch. People will make sure that their wishes are implemented by the sarpanch, whether sarpanch is good or bad. This is possible only when such a law is enacted where the power goes directly to the people.

#### Example of a village in North Kerala

What would be the beneficial effect of giving direct power to the Gram sabhas or the people? We will try to understand it through this example of village in north Kerala. In the panchayati raj system of the state, no industry can be set up in a village unless the gram sabha gives its acceptance to set the factory up. In a village in northern Kerala a multinational company wanted to set up a large factory for timber business. The company would have cut trees in the nearby areas for production of wood in the factory. The people did not want that the trees should be cut and, therefore, they refused the permission to put up the factory. The permission to set up the factory was granted to that company by the Minister of the state, by the collector of the district and even the pradhan of the village. But when this matter was raised in the gram Sabha the people opposed the very idea of the factory. It was affecting the ecology of their surrounding. They cared for the trees and did not want the ecology tempered with.

This shows that the government can be sold, collector could be bribed or sarpanch could be bought or could be brought under pressure but it is not possible to buy the people as a whole. They are the only ones who can decide what they want and what they do not because each decision affects their life. The power of decision should rest with them. They are the best judge of what is good or bad for them.

While every official in the chain gave permission to set up the timber factory, the people whose life matter the most were not consulted. If this law was not there then the factory would have come up and affected the life of people in that region.

#### Magic of a new law of Madhya Pradesh

In 2002 an amendment was brought about in the law that governed panchayati raj. A provision was made that if a government employee did not perform his duty properly then by calling gram Sabha they could vote to stop his salary. This had some positive effects. Some examples are given below.

We went to many schools of villages in Amrawati Block of Chindwara District. Earlier the teachers did not come to school. They used to come on the last day of the month to collect their salaries. When this law came into effect, the villagers called the gram Sabha where they took a joint decision that the salaries of teachers should be stopped. For two months salaries were stopped but from third month the teachers started to come regularly. It was such a simple solution. If power is given to the people directly, they will take care of their own development.

We went to one more village of Madhya Pradesh. An Anganwadi worker did not visit the village regularly for  her  duties. One  day  the  sarpanch collected all the  people  and questioned her  in front of  the gathering on her duties that she performed in last six months. It was very difficult for her to tell a lie in front of everyone. She accepted in front of everyone that she had visited the village only twice in last six months. She was then questioned on the government funds that were under her charge. She had no alternative but to accept that the money was embezzled by her.

Imagine what alternative people had if this power been not vested in them. That Anganwadi worker was not coming for the job and she had embezzled the money. What the people could have done? They had only one choice; to report her to an Anganwadi officer only. Their report would have been consigned to a waste paper basket. If the Anganwadi officer was good then he would have started an investigation against the complaint. Investigator would go to the village, take bribe from the Anganwadi worker and would write in the report that the worker was coming to the village for last six months and that there is no basis for the report lodged by the people. The complaint should be dismissed. After this the villagers could have staged a sit in but the result would have come to naught.

But when the power was given directly to people and gave right to take decisions then there was no need to start an investigation. It took only two minutes for that anganwadi worker to accept that she had  come only  twice  during  last  six  months  and that  she  had embezzled the  money  sent  by  the government.

As soon as she accepted her crime some young boys suggested that she should be suspended but some older people advised that it was not their intention to punish her but to reform her. She was given ten days to mend her ways and attend to her duties regularly. It was agreed that if she mends her ways then it was alright but if does not, then a meeting would be convened of the gram Sabha where she would be suspended. Actually she got reformed and did her duties diligently and the need to suspend her never arose.