# Why Swaraj?

I was working for the income tax department earlier.  At the end of the 90's, the income tax department carried out a survey of many MNC's. During this survey, these MNC's were caught red handed evading income tax.  They  accepted their  crime and paid the  entire amount without  an appeal.  Had these companies been in other countries, their senior executives would have been jailed. During the survey one chief executive of an MNC threatened the income tax team by saying that their presence in the country boosted its economy; that they were here to help a poor country like India but if the income tax department continued to bother them they would pack up and leave. His boast did not seem an idle one when he said that he had access to the parliamentarians at the centre that he could get his bills passed and could even get personnel who bothered them transferred. The threat rang true when one of the senior officers of our team was actually transferred.

At that time I did not give much importance to the talks of these foreign companies. I thought they were venting their anger, frustrated with the process of survey. But I started to see the truth behind their talks by many incidents that happened in the last few years. I started to question the truth of their claim; "Did they really have control over our parliament?"

In July 2008, the then U.P. government had to prove its majority on the floor of the assembly. MLA's were being bought and sold. Certain TV channels showed these MLA's accepting money openly. Those video scenes gave me a sinking feeling in the pit of my stomach. If MLA's could be sold like this then what is the value of our vote. Today the leaders are buying the legislators of the country to save their party. Tomorrow the same legislators could be bought by any other country like America or Pakistan. It is possible that such a thing is happening, but who knows. This thought sent tremors of terror through my mind and body.

**Are we citizens of a free country?**

**Are the Members of Parliament of our country making laws for the welfare of its people only?**

A few days back when I read in the newspapers about the Nuclear Civil Liability bill being presented in our parliament then all fears seemed to come true. The bill proposes that if a foreign company sets up a nuclear facility In the country and if an accident were to occur in the said nuclear facility then the liability of the company is limited to Rs.1500 crore only. Whenever, an accident has taken place in a nuclear facility anywhere in the world hundreds have perished and that country has suffered losses amounting to several thousand crores. For example estimates of Chernobyl nuclear accident in Russia are pegged at Rs. 11650 thousand crores (US $235 bn)

Here our parliament is ready to accept a meager sum of US $ 0.35 bn (Rs.1500 crore). In the Bhopal Gas leak tragedy 2000 people died and an estimated 578000 people were affected but Union Carbide, the company responsible for the same, paid a sum of Rs.2200 crore (US $ 470 million) only, that too after twenty  years  of  litigation.  Compare  this  to  Oil  leak  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  where  the  Obama administration is demanding damages to the tune of US $ 40-60 bn. (Rs.1800 thousand crore-2600
thousand crore) from British Petroleum. The best part is, there was no loss of human life in the oil spillage.

A nuclear accident, therefore, would be like many Bhopal tragedies. Many clauses in the Nuclear Civil Liability bill also ensure that no criminal complaint would be lodged against the foreign company and no liability suit would be filed in any court of law. There would be no police case registered and the company can go scot-free after paying Rs.1500 crore only.

After reading this law, it felt that the lives of citizens held no value to our law makers. It is evident that this law was  enacted by putting on wager the lives of its citizens for the benefit of foreign multi-nationals. Why is our parliament taking such decisions? It is certain that either it's members are under some external pressure or some members or parties have been bought by foreign companies.

There are and were a lot of news items circulating in the papers during the time of the Bhopal Gas tragedy. When the court decided the compensation recently, the senior members of political parties and government officers treated the chairman of Union Carbide as state guest and helped him flee this country.

Observing these things doubts arise in the mind "Is the country in safe hands? Do we see our lives and our future safe in the hands of few of these political leaders and government officers"?  It is not only that our Government is under the pressure of foreign powers and foreign multi-national companies, but for  money,  political  leaders  and  bureaucrats  can  do  any  thing.  It  has  been  observed  that  certain business houses have become absolute power centers. In a recent phone tapping expose, the decision for distribution of portfolio to ministers in the present government was not being taken by the Prime Minister but by certain business houses. It is now an open secret that some ministers and bureaucrats of the government have got affiliated to certain business houses. They openly associate with each other. It will not be an exaggeration to say that certain state governments and certain ministries in the centre are being run by business houses.

A few days back there was news in the papers that a certain industrialist wanted to establish a private University in Maharashtra. He met the Education Minister of Maharashtra who in turn decided to table a bill  in  the  state  assembly  that  allowed  private  parties  to  establish  universities  in  the  state  of Maharashtra. Our state assemblies are ever ready to fulfill the wishes of the industrial houses.

The mines of our country are being sold to these industrial houses for pennies. The companies that mine iron ore pay a royalty of Rs 27/tonne only. The same iron ore is sold in the open market by these companies  for  a  price  of  Rs 6000/tonne. It  would be worth while  to  know  that  the  expense  for extracting iron and cleaning it is Rs 300/tonne only.

**Is this not plundering of national wealth?**

In the same way our forests, rivers and other natural treasures are being exploited and manipulated by the  wealthy and  the powerful . Small landowners and farmers are being forced out of their land at a paltry compensation in the name of development. The same land is then sold to these companies at throwaway prices. Natural resources and wealth of our country is not safe in the hands of the political leaders and the bureaucrats any more. If nothing is done quickly then they will sell everything, even the country.

There is a big question mark that looms large; a big question mark indicating the health of Indian politics and the Indian republic. All the leaders of the so many political parties that exist are the same. We can select leaders from one party or the other but the content of that political leader will not change.

In last sixty years we have tried every political party and every political leader. But there has been no improvement in the condition of the country. One thing is certain that nothing happens when you change political parties or the leaders.

We will have to do something more.

We have been working, for the last ten years, on various issues through our NGO "Parivartan". Some times we worked on Public Distribution system and at other times on privatization of water. Many a times we raised issues of corruption on the development work of the government.   We got partial success, too. But this success we realized was ephemeral and delusionary in nature. We got success on the issue till the time we worked on it in that area but as we moved on to next issue the old issue became even worse than before.. There are innumerable issues in our country and a sense of dejection started to seep in looking at the task in front of us. But we started to realize that the root of the problem is in the political system of the country.

All these issues crop up due to the corrupt politicians and their parties that have a nexus with criminal elements. Take the example of people involved with the grand theft of ration. These elements are under the direct protection of the political parties and their masters. When a complaint is lodged against theft of ration by a shop keeper to an inspector of food and civil supplies or the commissioner or the minister concerned, nothing happens because all these people are together in the theft. A large sum of the theft reaches the top echelons. How can we expect justice against our complaint from the people who are robbers themselves?  At places where the media or the people exert their support then as an eye wash licenses of such shops are terminated. When the pressure of the public eases the officials of the food department take bribes and the same shops are then reinstated.

In this whole drama citizens have no powers except to lodge complaints against the thieves to thieves, hoping for a stringent action that is rarely taken.

What we have started to understand is that the law of the land must empower the citizens so that instead of making complaint against the theft of ration, the people themselves could punish the shop keeper. The citizens must have direct control over the establishment where the decision of the people is implemented by the government officers and political leaders.

Can this happen? Can one hundred and twenty crore people of this country be empowered to take judicial decisions?

Citizens are the owners in a democracy. The citizens have given the right to parliament and the government to take decisions on their behalf,    for their welfare. But the government, the parliament and the legislative assemblies have blatantly misused this right. Shamelessly and openly they have sold the citizens and their rights for Money.

Is it time that we the citizens take back the right that we had given to the political parties, the politicians and the government officers to take decisions on our behalf for our welfare. Is it possible? Will it create anarchy?

I have traveled a lot, read a lot and have met a lot of people to find the answers for the same. Whatever, I have understood I am presenting it in the form of this book. If you have any doubts after reading this, please do contact us. If you are convinced with the issues raised in this book then please get involved with this movement whole heartedly. Time is very short. The wealth and the power of this country is being sold to foreign companies and countries at a fast pace. If we do not act quickly it would be too late.