# Baseless Doubts & Assumptions

When the proposals are mooted for giving power directly to the people then detractors come up with a lot of doubts. We are making an attempt to assuage those fears and phobias over here.

#### Atrocities on backward classes

Some people fear that if gram sabhas are given power then atrocities on backward classes will increase. To find the answers we went to localities where many people from backward classes lived. We explained to them our concept of self governance and asked them this direct question "Will atrocities on your class increase if gram sabhas are made more powerful?”  The backward classes believed that under such system they will have a greater power to fight. When atrocities are committed on backwards in the village, they have nowhere to go in the present system. No one is with them. On the other hand, current establishment and the system are with the perpetrators, responsible for exploitation. The police are with the exploiters, the collector of the district, BDO and tehsildar work as agents of the exploiters.  The backward have no where go? Even if all the backwards get together, then they have no option other than to demonstrate in front of the collector's office but if gram sabhas are given the power then the united backwards can raise their voice in front of panchayat. There are always sympathizers in the high caste who want to support the backwards when they see atrocities are being committed. In the present system they do not have a voice and they have no role to play. But if gram sabha is an empowered body then these people will raise their voice and be counted. This was the reaction of backward classes to our question. Besides this in self governance a new chapter will begin in struggle for the rights of the backward. In new dispensation a lokpal will be installed. If in some village backwards are denied the right to attend the gram Sabha, then in that case they can make a complaint to lokpal. He is duty bound to convene a gram sabha under his supervision and make sure that gram sabha is conducted in fair manner where presence of the backward class is registered, too.

It is not that the condition of backward classes will immediately improve, but in today’s system when the entire power is concentrated under the government establishment then there are more chances of misuse of political power. However, when this power is distributed to the people of the gram sabha then the misuse of power will diminish considerably. Our belief is that exploitation in the gram sabha would be much less. It is only when the power is concentrated in the hands of few, then this power is misused. It would be erroneous to say that atrocities on some backward classes will increase if power is given to gram sabhas. Their condition may improve or not but one thing is certain that atrocities will not increase at least. The options which are available in the current system will still remain available but new avenues will increase.

#### Fear of Khap Panchayats

Some sight the example of Khap panchayats where it has been found that the panchayats had taken the decision to pass judgment on killing of young boys and girls who fell in love with each other against the prevalent norms of society. Is it not possible that gram sabhas will take such decisions emulating same model?

Whether Khap panchayats had given such orders or not is a debatable issue? Without getting into a controversy, we would like to emphasize that under the law such powers to pass judgment of taking a life will neither be given nor it exists even now. Such decisions will be illegal. In the system that we are proposing gram sabhas will be able to take all decisions which will be within the purview of the law. They will not be given right to take decision beyond the constitution and the law under which they operate. To pass judgment on killing someone for honour or beating up someone or hanging a person would be beyond their domain of their power. Suppose some gram sabhas decide not to be part of India and want separation, then such a proposal would be against the constitutional law and the gram Sabha will have no power to pass such a resolution. The gram sabhas can operate within the frame work of authority that is vested in them.

#### By giving powers to Gram Sabhas, malpractices of society will increase or decrease?

There are many evils in society like dowry, child marriage, declaring someone as devil and persecute him or her, belief in ghosts and goblins. What will be the effect on these by giving powers to gram sabhas? Will such prevalent practices increase or decrease?

These evils are in perpetuity from many centuries because of wrong beliefs. These beliefs have taken roots in our psyche. Some of the evils have been declared as crimes under the law and provisions have been made for punishment. If gram sabhas support any of the evils then it would be against the law.

It seems very unlikely that the evils will increase if the power is vested in the gram sabhas but the chances of evil decreasing also seem remote. If these prevalent evil practices have to reduce then a different movement will have to be started that will work on the social level to cleanse the mind of beliefs that have created a space in people’s psyche for many centuries.

> People will have differences

Many opponents of gram Sabha model argue that villagers cannot take decisions because they are uneducated. In the gram Sabha assemblies they will fight with each other. A sarpanch is elected by a majority vote. The detractors argue that even if a sarpanch wins with a majority of 60/40 vote then the
40 will oppose and will not let the gram sabhas be conducted peacefully. The statistic around the world, however prove that these fears have no basis.

In this book we had taken the example of Hivere Bazar where there were warring factions of people who used to fight with each other. There were cases of murder and every week the police used to make rounds. Even there when the gram sabhas started, the attendance was very thin but as the gram sabhas progressed people started to take up the issue of these group rivalries and brought out solution to end the same. By mutual discussions they started to come together and today Hivere Bazar is a model gram Sabha worthy of emulation.

In Delhi assemblies of people are taking place under the banner of “Resident Welfare Associations”. In these association meetings all kinds of people come from diverse group. There is a BJP councilor and so is the councilor from the congress to attend the meeting. People discuss their problems. There are differences that lead to arguments. The discussions are important but in the end decisions are taken.

One thing is certain that in villages where people gather under one forum and discuss their problems and solutions, there development will take place. In villages where people only fight with each other there no improvement can take place. In such places the people will only blame the administration and keep pointing fingers at corrupt officials, local parties or the politicians. Such people are responsible for their own fate and must understand that they themselves are incapable, having rivalries with each other and unless they reform themselves they have little chance of redemptions themselves. They will not be able to hold someone else responsible for their poverty, their fate, their unemployed status, and their lives but themselves.

In today’s system political leaders, located at the state capitals like Bhopal, Lucknow or at the centre in Delhi takes decisions about our life. Argue yourself and decide what is better; who will be better judge to take decisions about our life, we in villages or an official or a politician sitting at a distant capital? Needless to say, the decision taken jointly by the villagers. When all the villagers assemble together then there would be arguments, differences, hot exchange of words, may be scuffles or fights but in the end the decision will be of the village. We are thirsty and want wells in our village but the official in the state capital decides to build parks for us and send computers for us.  How does he know what is that we want the most? It is our village, whether we fight or live peacefully but whatever decisions that we take will be for the common benefit of our village. Decisions for our colonies should be taken on the local level of the colony only. This is what is best for all of us.

#### Panchayat Extension to Scheduled Areas (PESA), what happened to this law?

Under PESA gram sabhas have been given powers but there is no success, is the argument of the detractors of our gram sabha model. They claim that under PESA the backward areas have made no progress, nothing is visible to prove that giving power to gram sabhas can bring about a change. They say that gram sabhas are ineffective and non existent.

On the other hand truncated powers are given to the gram sabhas under PESA. Whatever is provided for in the law under PESA the state government does not even implement that.

PESA states that the plan for development in the village would be made in the gram Sabha. In other words, how the government money would be spent in the village will be decided by the gram Sabha. The statistics show that money is allotted to the villages under various schemes of the central government. This is not free fund. The money that is to be spent, where and how in a village, is already decided at the capital of the country. Then how will the villagers make their own project plans? The funny thing is that villages have been given the right to spend the money in a way that they want but the money is not given. Under PESA there is no provision of control of any sort over the government officials.  Under PESA  no  control  is  given over the government officials  like village  teachers,  forest officers, health officer, tehsildar and the police officers. Gram Sabha can take any decision but all these

officials are the ones who will implement the plans formulated by the villagers. If these officials do not implement the decisions taken by gram sabhas then the gram sabhas can take no punitive action against them. These officials are under the state government. They are employees of the state government and not the gram sabhas. Mostly it is seen that instead of obeying the wishes of the gram sabhas the indulge in victimization of the villagers.

The PESA law clearly states that before acquiring the village land the government will enter into a dialogue for seeking approval with the gram sabhas. In most places it is observed that this dialogue is a mere formality. In reality, after this formality, police is brought into the picture and land is acquired forcibly.

PESA is far more liberal than the law of gram panchayat. Unless the right is given to gram sabhas over the control of free fund, control over government officials and the natural resources until then this dream of Swaraj cannot become a reality.

### Entry of honest individuals in Politics will make a difference?

There is a general belief that honest individuals if selected as members of parliament or legislative assembly by the people will make a lot of difference to the problems of the areas from where they have been voted to power. This assumption is wrong that this will ensure the removal of problems in ones areas.

We have to first understand the role that a member of parliament or of legislative assembly plays in our system of governance. A member of parliament is merely a member of parliament and member of legislative assembly is merely a member of state assembly.

If we have problem in our areas of water scarcity or electric power not available or if the roads are broken or cleaning of the areas is not taking place, there is unemployment or poverty then we approach the MP or MLA. What we need to understand is that they have no powers to give solutions to remove these problems. The constitution does not give them any administrative power. The duty of the MP, as per constitution, is to enact laws in the parliament for common benefit. The duty of the MLA, as per constitution, is to enact laws in the state assembly for the common benefit of people. If the government machinery is not working properly then it is not with in the power of a MP or MLA to change it or improve it. No power is vested in the MP or MLA, either in constitution or in the law, to tackle the problems of his constituency. If a ration shop is not distributing rations fairly or a road is broken then the MLA or MP has no power to take action against the ration shop or the engineer who built that road. The MLA or MP can raise a question in the state assembly and the parliament. Every member, in fact, wants to raise questions on issues in his areas. The result is plethora of request for raising questions in the state assemblies and the parliament, that a lottery system is adopted from the list of questions during question hour.

The bottom line is even if the MP or MLC wants, having good intentions, he cannot make sure that he could raise questions in the Parliament or the state assembly. Fate of your problem is assigned to a lottery, ironic but true.

A member of parliament gets a sum of rupees two crore for to undertake development works in his own constituency. Very strange that he can only approve the works that can be undertaken in the constituency but he has no control over the quality of work that has been executed. This power to execute the work is under officials of various government departments. MP’s and MLA’s have no control over the government departments or on its officials. Even if an MP finds out that the work carried out of his fund is substandard or poor quality he has no powers to stop payment of the bills raised for the contract. It is heard that a lot of MPs and MLAs accept bribes for sanctioning the work.

The work of a MP or MLA is reduced to enacting laws in the parliament and the state assembly. Unfortunately even in this area their hands are tied. Whenever a bill is tabled in the parliament, to pass it as a law, the party issues whip or direct its MPs and MLAs to either vote for or against the law. MPs and MLAs are bound with the party and therefore, they have to obey the party directive. It is pity that they do not have the independence of voting for or against a law with their own free will.

It is evident that they cannot take care of our day to day problems and they are incapable of even making laws that are for the benefit of the people. It is ironic that these are the people whom we had voted to represent us. But in the parliament they do what the party wants and not what the people want. If they do not obey the party dictates then they could be punished and loose their berth as MP or MLA.

It boils down to the fact that even if you have chosen an upright individual as your representative for the parliament, then neither he is in a position to take care of your daily problems nor he is able to formulate good laws for you. This is very strange that in our democracy neither people have any voice nor the chosen representative. The power is centered around the Prime Minister, the Chief Ministers, the Ministers. Through the process of elections we select our representatives but for five years of their tenure the powers remains in the hands of few ministers and the government officials. People and their representative have no control over the system.

> Can such a democracy look after the interest of the people? Can we be proud of such a democracy?

Mirchipur  of  Haryana  state  witnessed  atrocities  being  committed on  the  backward  classes.  In our
parliament more than 70 % members are from the notified or backward areas. These MPs have been selected from the reserved constituencies. This is done to make sure that these MPs will protect the rights of the people of notified and backward areas. When atrocities were committed on the backward classes  in Mirchipur,  we  wonder  why  this  matter  was  not  raised  in  the  parliament  by  these  70% members from the same areas. When we contacted the MPs we were told that it is not possible to raise any question without the consent of the party.

Our democracy is victim of dictatorship of the party politics

We have no dissent with those who subscribe to the suggestion that we must select the right candidate. There are no two views on this thought. But the selection of right individuals will not bring about a change in the system as we expect. This is also true that if we select the criminal elements then they will pollute the existing system more. On the other hand when we select right individuals then the system will not improve but the degradation will stop or at least the pace of degradation will reduce considerably.

Today the system has deteriorated to an extent when an honest Minister or MP cannot do anything for its betterment. His colleagues under him or over him would not let him. It is often observed that many an honest officers who understand our problems and view point express their inability to help. They are so bound in the corrupt system that they feel helpless.

Reform is impossible without change in Political system

There are many well meaning organizations filled with honest individuals who are working on various national issues. Some  are working on health and some on education; some are working on water resources and some on forest or land issues. We have to understand that unless we change the political system in which the power to decide is given in the hands of the people, nothing will improve; neither education will improve nor the health services. There would be no improvement in the other issues like land, water and forest. Even if we use all our resources in changing the laws governing the land, governing the forest or the law governing the water resources, the laws would still be implemented by a Collector of a district. But if he does not implement the laws or disregards the laws then we have no recourse to any action against him. It has been happening often in our country that there are perfect laws that have been enacted but each one of these laws have been violated. The government officials who are supposed to implement these laws themselves violate the laws then there is no hope for the country.

Therefore, it is necessary that there should be control of gram sabhas over these officials. Unless these officials are answerable to the village gram sabhas which is empowered to punish an erring official for dereliction of his duties no improvement can come about, in the system of education or health or water or land or forest.

We have to catch hold of the proposed weapon “Accountability to people” which will be responsible to bring about change.

### Building character and system reform

Some people subscribe to the view that if we imbibe the virtuous values of truth, honesty and justice as the basis of people’s character then the systems will improve by itself.

The current system has degraded so much that it is doubtful that this system will help build character. The present system is hampering the process of building the character?

In today’s system, virtue is not rewarded but the people look at the virtuous with indifference and skepticism. There are some failures of the system which prevent a person from becoming upright even if he wants to. Without the overhaul of the present system, it will not be possible to imbibe the virtues of honesty and justice?

Let us take an example to understand this dichotomy. The shop keepers who sell ration and kerosene oil get such a small commission that they cannot survive without becoming dishonest. Every dealer of kerosene oil gets a commission of seven naya paisa on every litre of kerosene. Every dealer has a quota of 10000 litres per month. In other words he gets an income of Rs. 700/- per month. In this income he has expenses of his shop and he also has to take care of his family. This is an impossible task. What else can he do except indulge in malpractices. There are 4000 such dealers in Delhi alone. In one stroke of pricing policy of the government the system has corrupted 4000 people across the city.

Unless the government increases their commission how can anyone expect them to become honest? Unless the system changes there is hardly any hope of building people’s character.

Why there is need for building character of people? Why there is need for building sound operating system?

By controlling own desires and attachments, man attains nirvana that is believed to be the goal of life. To move towards a state of perfection is the aim of life and the universe. Sound systems of governance help in building a virtuous character but bad systems impede the same process. If there are good models of governance then it will help speed up the process of building human character. Therefore, building the system in which we operate is the only way. This is the only ladder on which one can climb up the path of virtuous character. There are no two views about the fact that as virtue takes root in people’s character; the operating systems will improve, too. As the improvement in the system takes place, the character building process will get a boost. To fight for truth and justice by following the path of righteousness and to restore the Dharma, in other words operating systems, is the greatest action (Karma Yoga) a man can aspire for. Engaging in actions in consonance with the path of Dharma help imbibe the virtues of righteousness in mankind.

We  observe  that  most  of  the  political  leaders,  government  officials  and  businessman  indulge  in dishonest practices. Many of them do wrong since they have no other option of survival in the present system. If they are offered right systems then many of them will be reformed. Both the jobs, system reforms and individual reform are extremely important.