# Connect with your RWA or Gram Sabha

Whenever a proposal is mooted to give direct power to people through RWA’s and gram sabha, then government argues that people will fight with each other. That people are divided in the name of religion and in the name of caste and, therefore, they can not be given power. History is proof that whenever  people have  demanded  independence,  then  rulers  have  taken  the  refuge  of  “division between groups” as the reason to deny power to the people. The English used division as a tool to rule the country. Instead of bridging the differences amongst people, rulers tried to widen the rift between them and then use this as an excuse to deny the power. Our leaders, the political parties and the government officers of our country are playing the same dirty game of religion and caste which drives a wedge of separation between the people.

The first and the foremost duty, therefore, is to let the leaders know that we, the people, want the power back which was given to them on 26th January, 1950. They have misused the power and now we need to be free to bridge the differences amongst ourselves.

Our second priority should be to start movements that bridge the differences created by caste, creed and religion in our society. Therefore, it is essential that people should start and get connected with gram sabha’s and RWA’s on village and city level.

We have to ensure that our RWA’s and gram sabhas are not the helpless recipients of dole distributor of the government. Dr. B. D. Sharma has made a suggestion as to how the meetings of gram sabha should start.

First people should greet and know each other.

They should discuss their personal problems with each other related to house, village or a city in which they live.

They should then deliberate on personal, family, social and local problems that affect them. They should not only discuss the problems but also come up with solutions. People should find most of the solutions to their problems on the level of village or locality. For e.g.: if someone is very sick in one household, then members of the gram sabha should find methods to help him. This will help the people to bond together. More and more people then will come to gram sabha meetings. If Sarpanch of your village or the president of RWA calls for monthly meetings it is good, and if he does not do it, then, the members should themselves decide a date every month to meet, in which people from backward section of society should be invited. In the beginning few people will come but by consistent efforts people will start to come. This is what gram sabha is. Each individual member should be free to voice his problems. The discussions of problems and solutions and implementation will bond the people together. With passage of time, with solution in sight, the number of gram sabhas will increase.

In every meeting the sarpanch should be invited. If he does not come in two three meetings, then, under the right to information act, get the information of works conducted in last few months and produce in front of the gram sabha assembly. It is very important that the open meetings should be conducted at regular intervals. Just like Gram Sabhas are organized in the same way meetings of RWA in the cities should be organized. The first requirement is that the people should connect with each other. They should establish a social relationship. Slowly discussions will takes place on local and national issues. After mutual discussions local ward councilors should be invited. He should be apprised of the experiments that are going on in connection with the RWA. If the councilor agrees then organize the association meetings with him and if does not agree even then keep meeting amongst yourself. In this connection you could know about various experiments that are going on for Swaraj. This is the way differences between the people will be bridged. Until such times as political leaders and parties have the power in their hands they will keep driving wedges of division between the people. The day Gram Sabhas in villages and RWA’s in cities begin to meet together, that is the day when the journey to join together will start.

Please let us know your experiences of organizing and working of gram sabhas and RWA’s through phone, e-mail or your letter. Our knowledge will increase with your experiences. If you want to change the picture of this country then we have to work together hand in hand.